docs: testnet 5 documentation for Babylon validators (#369)
babylonlabs-io/networks: bbn-test-5/babylon-node/README.md

# Babylon Node Setup

## Table of Contents

1. [Install Babylon Binary](#install-babylon-binary)

> 2. [Setup Node Home Directory and Configure](#setup-your-node-home-directory-and-configuration)

Reviewer: 3. missing

> 4. [Create Keys](#create-keys)

Reviewer 2: Do we need to add the `4. [Create Keys]` and `6. [Get Funds]` steps into this document as both of them are not needed to sync a new node

Reviewer: That's a good point, makes sense to move these to the validator guide instead.

5. [Sync Node](#sync-node)
6. [Get Funds](#get-funds)

## Install Babylon Binary 

> 1. Install [Golang 1.21](https://go.dev/dl)

Reviewer: It's 1.23 now.

2. Verify installation:

```shell
go version
```

3. Clone and build Babylon:
```shell
git clone git@github.com:babylonlabs-io/babylon.git
cd babylon
git checkout bbn-test-5  
make install
```
<!-- TODO: testnet tag to be defined -->
This command does the following:
- Builds the daemon
- Compiles all the Go packages in the project
- Installs the binary 
- Makes the `babylond` command globally accessible from your terminal

You should expect to see the following output:

```shell
# Build output will show:
go install -mod=readonly -tags "netgo ledger mainnet" \
    -ldflags '\
        -X github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/version.Name=babylon \
        -X github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/version.AppName=babylond \
        -X github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/version.Version=v0.13.0 \
        -X github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/version.
        Commit=976e94b926dcf287cb487e8f35dbf400c7d930cc \
        -X "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/version.BuildTags=netgo,ledger" \
        -w -s' \
    -trimpath ./...

> ```

Reviewer: I would remove this. I expect the flags to be changing with every new bbn version (e.g., `Commit`), which would make it confusing for the executor.

Now that the binary has been successfully installed, 
let's check the available actions through the `babylond` command:

```shell
babylond
Available Commands:
  add-genesis-account Add a genesis account to genesis.json
  collect-gentxs      Collect genesis txs and output a genesis.json file
  comet               CometBFT subcommands
  config              Utilities for managing application configuration
  ...
```

If the `babylond` command isn't found, ensure `$GOPATH/bin` is in your shell's 
`$PATH`. Add it with:

 ```shell 
 echo 'export PATH=$HOME/go/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.profile 

>  ```

Reviewer: Is this a cross-platform command?

## Setup your node, home directory, and configuration

Initialize your node and create the necessary configuration directory. 
This command will generate several important configuration files 
including `app.toml`, `client.toml`, and `genesis.json`:

```shell
babylond init <moniker> --chain-id bbn-test-5 --home <path>
```

The `<moniker>` is a unique identifier for your node (e.g. `node0`).
The `--home` flag specifies the directory where your node files will be stored (e.g. `--home ./nodeDir`).

> After initialization, you'll need to modify two important configuration files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After initialization, you'll need to modify the following configuration files:
```
This is more of personal preference :)

> 1. First, open `app.toml` and update these essential settings from what is auto-generated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First, open `app.toml` and update the following settings:
```

Again, we don't need to say it's important or essential.

```shell
# Base configuration

> minimum-gas-prices = "0.005ubbn"

Reviewer: Here, we should explain that these settings will disable IAVL cache to make the node utilize less memory.
In case of a node that will serve heavy RPC query load, these settings shouldn't be used.

iavl-cache-size = 0
iavl-disable-fastnode=true

[btc-config]

# Configures which bitcoin network should be used for checkpointing
# valid values are: [mainnet, testnet, simnet, signet, regtest]
network = "signet" # The Babylon testnet connects to the signet Bitcoin network
```

Navigate to `config.toml`. Add in your seed, as shown below:

```shell
 #P2P Configuration Options    

# Comma separated list of seed nodes to connect to

> seeds = "8fa2d1ab10dfd99a51703ba760f0ef555ae88f36@16.162.207.201:26656"

Reviewer: This will not be the endpoint of the testnet seed.
Here, we will point to Nodes.Guru seed node or to a page listing several seed nodes in the networks repository. Atm, I'd put some placeholder.

```

Next, you'll need to obtain the network's genesis file. This file contains 
the initial state of the blockchain and is crucial for successfully syncing 
your node. You can get it from:

1. The official Babylon Networks repository: [bbn-test-5](https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/networks/tree/main/bbn-test-5)

2. Or download directly using these commands:

```shell
wget https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/networks/raw/main/bbn-test-5/genesis.tar.bz2 # TODO: update this file name if necessary
tar -xjf genesis.tar.bz2 && rm genesis.tar.bz2

> mv genesis.json ~/<path>/config/genesis.json #insert your --home <path>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mv genesis.json <path>/config/genesis.json #insert your --home <path>
```

security by relying on OS-managed encryption and access controls.

The execution result displays the address of the newly generated key and its 
public key. Following is a sample output for the command:

```shell
- address: bbn1kvajzzn6gtfn2x6ujfvd6q54etzxnqg7pkylk9
  name: <name>
  pubkey: '{"@type":"/cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey",
           key: "Ayau+8f945c1iQp9tfTVaCT5lzhD8n4MRkZNqpoL6Tpo"}'
  type: local
```

Make sure to securely store this information, particularly your 
address and private key details. Losing access to these credentials 
would mean losing access to your account and any funds associated with it.

## Sync Node

We are now ready to sync the node.

```shell
babylond start --chain-id bbn-test-5 --home <path> --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants
```

Lets go through the flags of the above command:

- `start`: This is the command to start the Babylon node.
- `--chain-id`: Specifies the ID of the blockchain network you're connecting to.
- `--home`: Sets the directory for the node's data and configuration files and 
is dependant on where the files were generated for you from the initialization (e.g. `--home ./nodeDir`)

> ### Options for Syncing

Reviewer: As discussed, we'll need to update this section accordingly to accommodate the network upgrade.

You have two options for syncing your node:

1. **Sync through Network Peers**
   - Use the seed node configuration mentioned earlier in `config.toml`
   - Additional peers can be added under the `persistent_peers` setting
   <!-- Add peer list when available -->

2. **Sync from Snapshot**
   - For faster syncing, you can use a snapshot instead of syncing from genesis
   - Snapshots are periodic backups of the chain state
   - Find available snapshots at: <!-- Add link when available -->
   
>Note: Always verify snapshot sources and checksums before using them to ensure security.

## Get Funds

To interact with the Babylon network, you'll need some BBN tokens to:
1. Pay for transaction fees (gas)
2. Send transactions
3. Participate in network activities

You can obtain testnet tokens through two methods:

1. Request funds from the Babylon Testnet Faucet 
[here](#tbd) 
<!-- add link to faucet -->

> 2. Join our Discord server and visit the #faucet channel: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Join our Discord server and visit the `#faucet` channel: 
```

[Discord Server](https://discord.com/channels/1046686458070700112/1075371070493831259)

Note: These are testnet tokens with no real value, used only for testing 
and development purposes.

## Monitoring Your Node

Your Babylon node exposes metrics through two Prometheus endpoints:
- Port 1317: API metrics

> - Port 26660: Tendermint metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Port 26660: CometBFT metrics
```

To enable metric collection, modify your `app.toml`:
```
[telemetry]
enabled = true

> prometheus-retention-time = 60

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prometheus-retention-time = 600
```
This will delete Prom metrics after 60s. To make up for scrape delays, suggest making it 10 min.

[api]
enable = true
address = "0.0.0.0:1317"
```

Basic health monitoring should check:
- Node synchronization status
- Block height compared to network
- Connected peers count
- System resource usage (CPU, RAM, Disk)

## Security Recommendations

1. **Secure Key Management**
   - Store keys in a separate, encrypted storage system
   - Currently no secure keyring backend is supported for production use
   - Offline backups

2. **Network Security**

>    - Only expose necessary RPC endpoints in `app.toml` and `config.toml`

Reviewer 2: - Only expose necessary gRPC, REST, and CometBFT Endpoints in `app.toml` and `config.toml`
https://docs.cosmos.network/main/learn/advanced/grpc_rest

   - Configure rate limiting in your reverse proxy (nginx/caddy) for public endpoints
   - Use SSL/TLS certificates when exposing endpoints externally

3. **System Security**
   - Keep the host system updated
   - Monitor system logs for suspicious activity

>    - Implement regular security patches

Reviewer: A bit over the top, I'd remove.

network = "signet" # Bitcoin network for checkpointing
```

In `app.toml` under `[btc-network]`change network to `signet` and under 
`Base Configuration` set `iavl-cache-size = 0` and `iavl-disable-fastnode=true` 
instead of what is listed in the automatically generated template. 
Additionally, add `minimum-gas-prices = "0.005ubbn"`

Navigate to `config.toml`. Add in your seed that should look something like 
this `8fa2d1ab10dfd99a51703ba760f0ef555ae88f36@16.162.207.201:26656`

```shell
 P2P Configuration Options    

# Comma separated list of seed nodes to connect to
seeds = "8fa2d1ab10dfd99a51703ba760f0ef555ae88f36@16.162.207.201:26656"
```

Next, you'll need to obtain the network's genesis file. This file contains 
the initial state of the blockchain and is crucial for starting from the 
correct point. You have two options:

1. Download directly from the RPC endpoint: `https://rpc.devnet.babylonlabs.io/genesis`

2. Or use these commands in your terminal:

```shell
wget https://github.com/babylonlabs-io/networks/raw/main/bbn-test-5/genesis.tar.bz2 # TODO: update this file name if necessary
tar -xjf genesis.tar.bz2 && rm genesis.tar.bz2

> mv genesis.json ~/.babylond/config/genesis.json

Reviewer 3: Note that `~/.babylond` might not be the home directory being used by the reader.

```

>Note: Verify that the `chain-id` in the genesis file matches the one used in 
your initialization command (`bbn-test-5`). This ensures your node connects 
to the correct network.

> ## Setup the required keys for operating a validator 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this go to the validator guide?

### Keys for a CometBFT validator

The validator key is a fundamental component of your validator's identity 
within the Babylon network. This cryptographic key-pair serves multiple critical 
functions: it signs blocks during the consensus process, validates transactions, 
and manages your validator's operations on the network. Creating and securing this 
key is one of the most important steps in setting up your validator.

To generate your validator key, use the following command:

```shell
babylond --keyring-backend test keys add <name> --home <path>
```

> We use `--keyring-backend test`, which specifies which backend to use for the 
> keyring, `test` stores keys unencrypted on disk. 
> 
> There are three options for the keyring backend:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we use `--keyring-backend test`, that specifies the usage of the `test` backend
which stores the keys unencrypted on disk.
Alternatively, there are three options for the keyring backend:
```

`test`: Stores keys unencrypted on disk. It’s meant for testing purposes and 
should never be used in production.
`file`: Stores encrypted keys on disk, which is a more secure option than test but 
less secure than using the OS keyring.
`os`: Uses the operating system's native keyring, providing the highest level of 
security by relying on OS-managed encryption and access controls.

The `<name>` specifies a unique identifier for the key.

The execution result displays the address of the newly generated key and its 
public key. Following is a sample output for the command:

```shell
- address: bbn1kvajzzn6gtfn2x6ujfvd6q54etzxnqg7pkylk9
name: <name>
pubkey: '{"@type":"/cosmos.crypto.secp256k1.PubKey",
key: "Ayau+8f945c1iQp9tfTVaCT5lzhD8n4MRkZNqpoL6Tpo"}'

> type: local

Reviewer 3: Needs indentation? I think the sample output is indented.

```

Make sure to securely store this information, particularly your address and 
private key details. Losing access to these credentials would mean losing 
control of your validator and any staked funds.

### Keys for a BLS Voting
#### What is BLS Voting

> BLS (Boneh-Lynn-Shacham) voting is used to create compact checkpoints at the 
> end of each epoch. An epoch is a fixed period within the blockchain, defined or 
> set by a number of blocks, during which a validator set remains consistent. 
> This stability allows Babylon to create and submit checkpoints only once per 
> epoch, reducing the overhead of interacting with the Bitcoin blockchain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Babylon validators are required to participate in
[BLS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BLS_digital_signature) voting
at the end of each epoch.
The Babylon blockchain defines epochs as a fixed period
within the blockchain, defined or set by a number of blocks,
during which the validator set remains consistent. 
At the end of the epoch,
the validator BLS signatures are aggregated to create a compact checkpoint
that is timestamped on the Bitcoin ledger.
The BLS voting mechanism achieves a significant reduction in the cost of
checkpoints, while the epoching mechanism specifies a defined frequency
for checkpointing in the Bitcoin blockchain.
```

> To read more on BLS Voting please see [here](#) # TODO: add link when it is ready 

Reviewer 3: No need to have this if we don't have the blog yet. We can comment this out entirely.

Also, `#` comments don't work on markdown.

#### Create BLS Key

> The Babylon network uses BLS (Boneh-Lynn-Shacham) signatures as an efficient 

Reviewer 3: Do we need this paragraph given that we have the above one?

> way to create consensus checkpoints at the conclusion of each epoch. As a validator, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
way to create consensus checkpoints at the end of each epoch. As a validator, 
```

you'll need to participate in this process by submitting BLS signatures. 
This requires a special BLS key pair that's separate from your validator key.

> To generate your BLS key, you'll use your validator address from the previous step. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To generate your BLS key, you'll need to use your validator address from the previous step. 
```

Run this command:

```shell
babylond create-bls-key <address>
```

Replace `<address>` with your validator address from the earlier keyring 
generation (it should look similar to `bbn1kvajzzn6gtfn2x6ujfvd6q54etzxnqg7pkylk9`). 

The system will automatically:
1. Generate a new BLS key pair
2. Associate it with your validator address
3. Store it in your node's configuration file at 
`~/.<path>/config/priv_validator_key.json`

This key will be used automatically by your validator software when it needs 
to participate in epoch-end signature collection. The BLS signatures help 

> create compact, efficient proofs of consensus that can be verified by other 
> blockchain networks, particularly Bitcoin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
create compact, efficient proofs of consensus that can be later
timestamped to Bitcoin.
```

No need to be overly general

Important: The `priv_validator_key.json` file contains sensitive key material. 
Make sure to backup this file and store it securely, as it's essential for your 
validator's operation and cannot be recovered if lost.

## Sync Node

> We are now ready to sync the node.

Reviewer 3: You do not need to have validator keys to sync the node. The validator paragraph above should move completely to the validators doc.

To connect your node to the network, you'll need peer addresses.
<!-- insert links when we have them -->

As mentioned in the configuration step, add these to your `config.toml` 
under `persistent_peers` or `seeds`.

#### Use a Snapshot

For faster syncing, you can use a snapshot instead of syncing from genesis. 
Snapshots are periodic backups of the chain state. Find them at:
<!-- - add link here -->

Note: Always verify snapshot sources and checksums before using them to ensure security.

## Get Funds

To create a validator, you'll need some BBN tokens to:
1. Pay for transaction fees (gas)
2. Meet the minimum self-delegation requirement
3. Stake as your initial validator bond

You can obtain testnet tokens through two methods:

1. Request funds from the Babylon Testnet Faucet 
[here](https://faucet.devnet.babylonlabs.io/)

2. Join our Discord server and visit the #faucet channel: 
[Discord Server](https://discord.com/channels/1046686458070700112/1075371070493831259)

Note: These are testnet tokens with no real value, used only for testing 
and development purposes. The tokens help you experiment with validator 
operations without risking real assets.

## Next Steps

> For information about becoming a Finality Provider in the Babylon network, 

Reviewer: Same.
